MEETING TUESDAY 21 AFTER LECTURES
Coming Tuesday, 20 minutes after the lectures end*, I will organize a get together on this project. Everyone interested, please feel welcome. I will announce the location later, here. 
Please, do the following three things:

1)	If you are interested in the analysis, if you have not yet done so, please feel in the survey (we need data!)
2)	Think about what kind of thing you want to bring to this group: passive discussion/knowledge, or active ideas, hands on data analysis, and such 
3)	In the latter case of active participation, formulate your ideas in a less-than-5-minute (without slides) old fashioned talk/reasoning 

We will have approx. 5 min idea-statements followed by approx. 5 minute positive, constructive discussion (this will be like a brainstorm session, so all ideas are welcome).
After we have heard all ideas, the people who want to actively participate will be strongly involved in making a practical schedule.
I plan to have a first (anonymous) data-set available on Tuesday, if I’m lucky, before that.

I know that this will coincide with the individual talks of us, which are really interesting, too. The schedule with the labs, evening lectures, and so on, is just too full to do anything else. If you now have a double appointment, one solution is always to (convince your favorite speaker) to present in the last week.
Thank you for all your help and looking forward to Tuesday!

Evelien

PS
We might need some help with getting the data into a nice structure and such. If converting excel files to graphs is something you like to do, please drop me an email.

About the project 
Today the Networks Module has started. One of the well-known examples of a network, is a social network.
Did you realize you have been working hard on an (almost) completely new social network in the past few days?

How do these networks come in to place? How do we make friends? Will we be a fully connected network? How many hubs do we have - and can we explain how these hubs come in to place?

This is an excellent opportunity to find some answers to these questions!

The idea is to base the results on the contacts people make. Simply put: who did you have a conversation with? By noting this regularly, we can see the connectedness and sorts of the network evolve over time.

The plan is to collect data on
1) The evolvement of the network over time, in terms of nr of contacts (conversations lasting over 10 minutes) per approx. 2 days 
2) The 'final' network, as in the people you feel connected to (would like to contact for science or social activities)

All results will be processed anonymously and will appear (at the end of the summerschool) on the wiki.

We need your help off course, to answer these questions. 
The first survey can be found at: www.thesistools.com/web/?id=20584

If you are interested in this project, I will organize some discussion meeting (probably in the next week). For now: add your name to the list below, and send in the survey! (while encouraging as much of your connections as you can to do so, too ;) )

If you have any questions, send a message to ehuk at rsm dot nl.

Thank you so much for your help!

The CSSS11-network challenge team 
- Evelien 
- Tomas 
- Clio 
- Randy 
- Antoine 
- JP
- Cristina M.
- ....(put your name here if you are in any way interested)


Hey Guys! Some of your research interests have been entered. Hopefully this can give us a better idea of what we are studying, and how we can collaborate for the final challenge. They are organized in a google doc for sorting, searching etc, and all should have editing privileges. Sorry for typos!

LINK TO GOOGLE DOC SPREADSHEET

CHECK BACK FOR A NETWORK OF OUR INTERESTS!!!!!!

-Clio

