Sorry that this one is a bit long. I'd like to brainstorm with anybody interested to see if there could be a viable project in the following direction.

Let me first define aging: deterioration that happens as an organism, e.g. a human being, gets physiologically older, eventually leading to increased mortality and/or decreased fecundity.

Some background into the 'classic' theory: Evolution is about getting to be there in the future, that is, you and/or related organisms, for instance offspring. Increased mortality and decreased fecundity as such are clearly unfavorable to getting to be there in the future. Then why could it evolve? Well, evolution tends to become less sensitive to anything happening to an organism as time progresses, because events that take place at some point in time can affect only events that are future to that event. All offspring that an organism already has at some point cannot be affected anymore, and this is a non-decreasing function of time. This can be formalized, and I'd be happy to write down the math if anybody wonders.

It has, however, limited value to theorize too much about age-specific events, while in fact events at different ages are tied together in pathways of causality, dynamic change and so on; age per se is not a cause of anything, and changes at some age do not happen independent of changes at other ages. There are a number of sufficient arguments why the 'age-specific' picture does not capture this reality. I'm skipping these arguments for now, but ask if you are interested.

We have two things that matter for the evolution of aging. 1. The declining sensitivity of fitness to age-specific changes (of some standardized magnitude). 2. The fact that there are constraints that make that what happens at age x is not independent from what happens at the ages in its neighborhood. Thus, the trick is to figure out what the constraints are - this is where complexity may come in - and to combine these with the effect on fitness that age-related change has. The effect on fitness may be solved analytically, but there are various reasons why computation may be preferable, specifically the not always realistic assumptions that are necessary to allow for analytical solutions.

Mechanistically, people tend to think about aging in two ways. The first is that aging is caused by the accumulation of damage. If this damage were all repaired, aging would not occur. People then try to think of reasons why repair would be imperfect. The second way to think about it is as a gradual loss of robustness/control, sometimes in the context of reliability engineering (is anybody familiar with that?). Beautiful medical example: old people need more insulin to process a standardized dose of sugar, and their regulation shows more peaks, especially upward peaks, than that of young people, who tend to need less insulin to process the standardized dose of sugar. Of course, if you consider loss of control as a type of damage, the two are the same, but the distinction is perhaps helpful because the way people tend to think about damage is not in a dynamical way, but just as protein aggregates sitting in the brain, inhibiting the function, cartilage that looses its suspension, etcetera. Again of course, both may influence each other.

Now toward a project proposal. If I think about how complexity may (in part) determine physiological constraints, I think of the following. Usually people tend to think of repair being limited by available energy. But to repair something, the body needs to have available somewhere the information necessary to restore the initial state, and use that information at the place where the damage has occurred to be able to repair. This is where I hypothesize complexity comes in. The necessity of different components of the body to interact may put constraints on repair other than just energetic, it is also a question of whether the energy can actually be used for the repair (flow through the system in the necessary way). That may require space, a certain chemical environment, hormonal setting etcetera that may be incompatible with the proper function of an organism. (Can you repair a car when it is driving?) Also in the 'control/robustness thinking', you have to get back to the original situation to avoid aging. Is that compatible with the best evolutionary outcome?

These are just some ideas I'm throwing at you, as you see it's not perfectly fleshed out yet, which is good, because it should benefit from your perspective. So anybody interested, please let me know!

Cheers,
Maarten

