Project update: Some core members of the group are starting to assign tasks for the project. If some folks are still shopping for projects and want to check out what we're up to, please visit our  project page. --Vanessas 02:12, 6 June 2013 (UTC)


 Pablo and  I started to discuss a project where we could use cross-impact balances (CIB) to investigate the implications of alternative hypotheses for interrelationships between various socio-economic/political factors. We began discussing this from the perspective of testing competing political economic theories to see what types of institutions (e.g. styles and stability of governance) would be self-consistent according to the theories. However, I would be open to other topics, including research questions inspired by GDELT. If there is interest to learn more about the CIB technique, I could put together a tutorial.  -- Vanessa

- There's a paper written by Brian Arthur here at the SFI that might help us frame our topic. Its called Complexity Economics. Basically sets the "rules" for thinking about economics in a whole different way.
It is a very good starting point so we don't go any further wasting time taking into account economic models that are vague, non-accurate and out of date.  Pablo [?]

Elaborating more on the idea. If we focus on human action as the essence of culture. Understanding human action as the use of beliefs, attitudes and resources (which are scarce) pursuing a state of higher satisfaction. And culture as the sum of all beliefs, attitudes and unintentional consequences of the human action. We can state that the emergence of socio-econmic/political factors are the unintentional consequence of intentional individual actions that at the same time affect the way people act, in what they believe and what attitude they'll have toward the satisfaction of their needs. (Theres a loop between human action and culture - culture affects human action and human action affects culture and so forth)
Some "institutions" will emerge as a consequence of human action but not human design. That is one of the characteristics of a "good" type of institution. (e.g. Money, language, private property, contracts, a certain type of government) and it would be interesting to test the robustness of that spontaneously emerged institution against human designed institution who's robustness is just that is law enforced.
I dunno If you get my point? Compare the qualities of spontaneously emerged institutions against human designed institutions. Its more or less comparing spontaneously emerged institutions (no leader needed to coordinate like the birds flocking) vs. human designed institutions (leader needed to coordinate al human actions).

== 
A  tutorial on cross-impact balances and Markov chains is scheduled for Wed. June 5 at ~4:15. Everyone is welcome, even if your project interests lie elsewhere. ==

