West et al. have discovered striking—and universal—patterns in the way cities scale with size (see West's Ted talk, short Nature paper, longer PNAS paper). Do these scaling laws allow us to predict how big a city can be?

Here's a motivating analogy. The mass of an animal grows scales the cube of its size L, but the cross-sectional area of its leg bones scales only like the square of L. This implies that bigger animals must have bulkier leg bones in order to sustain their own weight. (Think of the legs of a mouse versus the legs of an elephant.) Since the bones can never get bigger than the animal itself, this immediately tells you that land animals cannot be arbitrarily large: they must have a maximum size. If you plug in the numbers and estimate this maximum size, you find a value consistent with the largest known dinosaurs. In fact, with similar reasonings—which were discovered by Galileo, by the way—you can easily find how tall trees can be, how high animals can jump, etc [9].

Now, to run a similar argument for cities, we should understand what constraints would limit their size (the equivalent of "the legs of an animal can never be larger than the animal itself"). These constraints may be technical, social—I'm not sure. (Crimes are perhaps an example. West et al. show that the number of crimes committed in a city grows faster than the number of inhabitants. Clearly then, at some point the likelihood to get shot the next day will get too high, and people will start leaving the city.) I wonder if the social scientists among us have any insight about such constraints, and whether we can actually come up with a prediction for the maximal size of a city based on them. –  Matteo


- Scaling patterns for cities are fascinating, but a potential data limitation to the PNAS paper is that the study was applied to cities in the US, EU and China. It can be argued that these economies have particular similarities that may not be transferable to cities in developing countries that are not China (e.g. Jakarta, Delhi, Manila). To complicate matters a bit more, there is little consensus on what a city is -- is it defined by the political boundary? What about the economic boundary determined by bedroom communities (suburbs)? If one takes the latter view of a metropolitan area, the population densities of some "cities" in developing countries is truly astounding. The New York metropolitan area can be interpreted as spanning 4500 sq. miles with 20 million people (a density of ~4600 people/sq. mile). Under the same interpretation, Jakarta spans only 1075 sq. miles with 25 million people (a density of ~25,000 people/sq. mile!!!). The point of my comment is that I wonder how well the scaling findings of West et al. hold up for cities in developing countries (that do not include China). It seems possible that there are scaling patterns there as well, but they might be different. By the way, I got my numbers for population densities from Demographia.  -- Vanessa


- Because of national differences, there's certainly no consensus yet on how to define the boundaries of a city. Even UN recognizes this and suggests following the boundaries established by individual countries. On the point of whether scaling patterns will be the same for developed and developing countries, the scaling patterns might still be the same (wealth creation leads to superlinear scaling while economies of scale results to sublinear scaling) but the actual value of the scaling exponents might vary. It would be interesting to see whether such two sets of exponents exist as it might explain why the experience of living in two cities of the same density can be different (case in point Manila with a pop'n density of 21.9 M vs Shanghai or NY with 20.9 M). To quantify the living conditions/living experience of cities, we can use the Economist Intelligence Unit’s 2012 Global Liveability Survey. If data is now available for developing countries, it wouldn't be hard to check this. But having lived in Manila and seeing how inefficient collection of census data in such cities can be, I doubt if we can have a substantial sample of developing countries with complete data. We can probably check here. 

As for setting the thresholds in computing for the maximal city size, we can use the parameter values for Melbourne as according to the EIU survey, it is the most livable city in the world. If somehow we decide that using this is not a good way of defining the thresholds and there's no other way of setting them, jumping off from Vanessa's point, what we can also do is have several sets of parameter constraints and say that if city A falls under category A with parameter constraints {A}, then this is the maximal size it can have. We can do some clustering analysis of the parameter space to determine the city categories. I think it would be worthwhile to talk to someone from the cities group here in SFI as they've already mentioned before how population growth behaves with the different scaling patterns.-- Cheryl


— Maximal city size is an interesting question and hard to answer with the boundary problem mentioned by Vennesa and Cheryl— Michael Batty also talks about this problem in 'Cities and Complexity' http://www.amazon.com/Cities-Complexity-Understanding-Cellular-Agent-Based/dp/0262524791. In biological organisms the upper limit is bounded not only by the cross sectional area of bones but also by the metabolic rate which slows down as an organism increases in size to a 3/4 power law (Klieber, West et al.) Metabolism in organisms is basically how efficient an organism is. What would be the corresponding metabolism of a city? Here is an idea: What if 'urban metabolism' were to be measured as wealth distribution (correlating with the distribution of blood in an organism)? Functional organisms distribute blood to all service volumes and limit non-essential ones when in pathological states. Crime, as you mention Matteo, increases super-linearly and one might very well imagine a large city becoming too dangerous to function— such as the LA riots or something. Perhaps this is like pathology in organisms where         crime is, in essence, the system attacking itself, i.e. cancer, immune disorders etc. 

West et al. have also found that infrastructure increases sub-linearly with population size making a city, at least physically, more efficient the larger it becomes. Here is a quote from the paper 'A Unified Theory of Urban Living':

“Cities manifest remarkably universal, quantifiable features. This is shown by new analyses of large urban data sets, spanning several decades and hundreds of urban centres in regions and countries around the world from the United States and Europe to China and Brazil. Surprisingly, size is the major determinant of most characteristics of a city; history, geography and design have secondary roles. Three main characteristics vary systematically with population. One, the space required per capita shrinks, thanks to denser settlement and a more intense use of infrastructure. Two, the pace of all socio- economic activity accelerates, leading to higher productivity. And three, economic and social activities diversify and become more interdependent, resulting in new forms of economic specialization and cultural expression. We have recently shown that these general trends can be expressed as simple mathematical ‘laws’. For example, doubling the population of any city requires only about an 85% increase in infrastructure, whether that be total road surface, length of electrical cables, water pipes or number of petrol stations. This systematic 15% savings happens because, in general, creating and operating the same infrastructure at higher densities is more efficient, more economically viable, and often leads to higher-quality services and solutions that are impossible in smaller places. Interestingly, there are similar savings in carbon footprints7,8 — most large, developed cities are ‘greener’ than their national average in terms of per capita carbon emissions. It is as yet unclear whether this is also true for cities undergoing extremely rapid development, as in China or India, where data are poor or lacking.
Similar economies of scale are found in organisms and communities like anthills and beehives, where the savings are closer to 20%. Such regularities originate in the mathematical properties of the multiplenetworks that sustain life, from the cardiovascular to the intracellular. This suggests that similar network dynamics underlie economies of scale in cities” (West, Bettencourt, A Unified Theory of Urban Living 2010).

I have been developing a tool in NetLogo to measure the fractal dimension of cities which, together with other metrics such as density, could afford an appropriate means to gauge the efficiency of various cities with the assumption that higher fractal dimension = more efficient distribution networks. I am interested in simulating cities with genetic algorithms and dimensioning the results— this technique could possibly support an endogenous limit to growth hypothesis using some fitness criteria such as the EIU parameters. Ecological services certainly decrease with city size and has prompted West to suggest that innovation must increase at an ever faster rate to offset the negatives imposed by growth. Here is another quote from West et al.:

“Open-ended growth is the primary assumption upon which modern cities and economies are based. Sustaining that growth with limited resources requires that major innovations — such as those historically associated with iron, coal and digital technology — be made at a continuously accelerating rate. The time between the ‘Computer Age’ and the ‘Information and Digital Age’ was some 20 years, compared to thousands of years between the Stone, Bronze and Iron Ages.Making major technological paradigm shifts systematically faster is clearly not sustainable, potentially leading to collapse of the entire urbanized socio-economic fabric. Avoiding this requires understanding whether we can continue to innovate and create wealth without continuous growth and its compounded negative social and environmental impacts” (West, Bettencourt 2010).

Fractal dimension applied to cities is still in its infancy and I wonder if this metric itself is necessary to refine relative to the questions this project presents. Multi-fractals for instance are a more nuanced metric and have not been applied to cities to my knowledge.  John Driscoll


To those still interested in discussing this further, I suggest we meet at lunch time later (6 June, 12pm) -Cheryl

