Keywords
Decision making, Health policy, Network influence

Summary
Decision makers in health choose which policies to support from a range of options. These decisions are theorised to be based on; what they see is the best option for society (i.e. public health), what they see is the best option for themselves (financially or politically), what they are told is the best option by other decision makers, what they think based on previous experience, or a combination of various processes.

Health policy outcomes are determined collectively via interactions within policy systems. Policy actors (e.g. government departments, charities, businesses, media etc.) work to influence each other and final policy decisions. Policies with high levels of support are more likely to be implemented, while disagreement between actors may stop one decision and lead to another less beneficial public health outcome. 

In cases of conflict, rival policy advocacy coalitions (network components) can form. Coalition structures may affect the flow of information between decision makers for future decisions, even when levels of conflict may be lower. This could in turn influence how well the policy process benefits public health, or benefits certain actors. 

This project aims to explore how the characteristics of actors within policy systems can lead to different policy outcomes and system configurations. We aim to construct health policy networks based on existing research and policy theory, develop models to explain the evolution of policy networks over time, assess how our model outcomes compare to outcomes in real policy systems, and determine how changing parameters of the model could change the outcomes of the system. 


The project will involve the following strands:

1. Identifying policy system structure; comparing UK and US policy systems (Based on political theory, health policy literature, or other suggestions from collaborators)
2. Determining the ways in which actors take decisions (Based on data envelope analysis, or other suggestions)
3. Constructing a model to show changes in policy systems over time (Boolean Network, other suggestions)
4. Determining are there certain characteristics of policy systems, policy actors, or policy options that lead to certain outcomes

The findings of the models could help us better understand conflict and coalitions in policy systems, and help us think about how to repair communication breakdowns in policy systems caused by highly contested policy debates. 



Group Contact
 Mark McCann  Mark.McCann@Glasgow.ac.uk 

Interested participants, please sign up below
 Jesus Mario Serna
  Rana Azghandi
 Marla Stuart
