Keywords
residential mobility, neighborhood change, network analysis

Summary
I have a few datasets laying around that I cleaned for my thesis (and I’m not using for that purpose) and a few more that I obtained but never cleaned. All of them are data for the city of Madrid (Spain) on various geographical and time scales/resolutions, most of them related to social/environmental/demographic variables. This includes socioeconomic, demographic and other type of data at the smallest unit available (~1500 people). I also have geocoded data on all housing units in the city (including size and year of construction) and geocoded data on all commercial properties (including open/closed and licensed use). Most of this data I have from 2005 to 2015 with yearly updates. The commercial spaces area is available from 2012 to 2016 with monthly updates from 2015 onwards. I also have data at other levels (bigger areas) related to occupation and other socioeconomic variables.  

The new thing I'm proposing is using a dataset I'm not using for my thesis which has information on yearly residential migration patterns within the city of Madrid. This includes information about how many people have moved from each neighborhood to any other neighborhood by level of education. If we consider neighborhoods as nodes and people moving as weighted edges, I have the feeling we can use the tools of network analysis to see which neighborhoods are the most unstable/changing (i.e.: neighborhoods that are in certain network structures [motifs], neighborhoods that are more central, etc.). This can be then easily coupled with data from the other sources described above or below. This data is available from 2004 to 2014 with yearly updates.  
See an example of how this network would look here:

 
There are a few other I have not used yet (and don't plan to use for my thesis). All of them come from datos.madrid.es (let me know if you need help figuring out what's what!) 
Traffic: dataset of traffic intensity in Madrid. This uses sensors placed in most traffic lights (~3600), and the dataset provides count of vehicles (and associated % capacity used) every 15 minutes, from 2013 to March 2016. Some of the data is messy (but they have a flag for unreliable data).
Noise: dataset of noise measured with ~30 static sensors, monthly averages, from 2000 onwards.
Polution: dataset of air pollution  measured with ~24 static sensors, hourly averages, from 2001 onwards.
Complaints: dataset of complaints (such as not working traffic light, litter on the street, etc), from 2014-2016, geocoded and with precise date/time.
Traffic infractions: dataset of infractions 2014-2016, with address (geocoded in 2016) and with precise date/time.

Interesting addition and comments to the idea
Please add your comments and idea about the project here!

Group Contact
Usama Bilal <ubilal@jhmi.edu>

Interested please sign up below
 Scott Armstrong
 Lorraine Sugar - also thinking about this more!
 Marius Somveille
 Jesús Arroyo
 Michael Schaub
 Ellen Badgley - would be interested in following along
Meetings
Let's meet Wednesday the 15th to discuss ideas! How about 7pm in the second place we did the speed dating yesterday? (That small courtyard with a wooden table) 
If you cannot make it but are interested in the group, email me (ubilal@jhmi.edu) and we'll try to see if we can organize a second meeting or discuss ideas in some other way.

