Summary
Note: I've changed the description/scope of the project.
Prestige goods, in a nutshell, are goods whose primary value is in conveying social status/ranking (think Rolexes and iPhones).  There is a great deal of speculation about how they contribute to increasing social complexity, including the idea that they were an older signaling system that predated true social stratification and was readapted for that purpose.  Aimee Plourde has developed a costly signaling model of prestige goods that AFAIK has not been tested out on a actual hunter-gatherer social network, so we would like to explore whether or not this model (or variants thereof) can result in emergent social complexity in an ABM.
Data for this is iffy, so primarily we would be looking at it as an exploratory model (but if anyone has data ideas let us know).
Kantner from the Santa Fe School of Advanced Studies has an alternate game-theory model for prestige goods that would be interesting to implement as well as time allows.  

Group Contact
Ellen Badgley (flyingrat42@gmail.com)

Interested participants, please sign up below
Simon Carrignon: I wrote already a general ABM to study that kind of things, but would be really happy to start from scratch something new in python or whatever!
 Awesome! I started reading your paper and it looks like a great starting point - maybe we could extend the model to distinguish between common goods (subsistence-level, go away after each season) and permanent prestige goods that convey social value, as well as looking into the implementations of prestige on agent actions.  If you would like to continue working on this for CSSS let's talk. - Ellen
Donovan Platt (donovan.platt@students.wits.ac.za)
Will Hamilton (wleif@stanford.edu)
Ben Zhu (b.zhu@tudelft.nl)
Joris Broere (j.j.broere@uu.nl)
William Leibzon (william@leibzon.org> - mostly observer/lurk mode

Group Organization
We have a Slack channel on https://sfi-csss-2016.slack.com.  If you need an invite to the Slack team, email flyingrat42@gmail.com.



Meetings

We're meeting in the coffee shop at 6:30, June 15th.

