Presentation
This is not properly speaking a project proposition as the idea is quite ambitious and the result may be more at a theoretical level than concrete and practical developments. If some are really interested but are already busy with other projects, I think this one can be done without heavy time consumption if it stays at a theoretical level.

The concept of morphogenesis is a powerful approach to many kind of complex systems. It aims at unveiling the processes responsible for the formation of patterns, and link the emergence of these patterns to functional properties of the system. This definition would sound wrong to anyone who has been involved with morphogenesis, as each field has its own definition and use of the concept. Proposing an interdisciplinary approach to this concept has already be done (see e.g. Bourgine & Lesne 2010, available  here ) but to my point of view its potential richness has not been exhausted. The idea would be to gather insights from various people having worked on morphogenesis and to study the potentialities of a self-consistent theoretical framework that would include the different views, and be autonomous as an approach to complex systems. The work would be both on an epistemological and theoretical level, but also potentially practical applications (e.g. develop an existing model someone has worked on, given the insights of other domains and of the theory).

Group contact
Juste Raimbault (juste.raimbault@polytechnique.edu)

Interested, sign up below
 add your field and if you worked on morphogenesis, which particular approach

 Juste Raimbault [worked on various models of urban morphogenesis, and currently trying to develop a theory of co-evolutive territorial systems which one of the core components is morphogenesis]
  Lars Hubatsch [I work in C. elegans which is a classical biological system for morphogenesis]
 Jesus Mario Serna (familiar with geomorphogenesis and the possible relations to psychological structures)
 Emanuele Crosato (I studied Artificial Life and I've been investigating Artificial Self-assembly, and also produced a literature review on it)
 Moriah Echlin (I have some experience with pattern formation in networks and experience in theoretical biology/modeling)
 Chris Revell (cr395@cam.ac.uk - I work on computational modelling of self-organisation in the mammalian embryo)
 Aina Ollé Vila (aina.olle@upf.edu)-I study tissue organization and cell differentiation
 Chenling Xu (chenlingantelope@gmail.com) - I have not studied morphogenesis but I am interested in learning about a species of frog that has a few different skin patterns (spotted, horizontal stripe and vertical stripe) for imitating a poisonous frog. I don't know the genetic basis of how the patterns are produced but I think if we can figure out how to reproduce the natural patterns by varying parameters in a diffusion system and predict what the minimum number of genetic changes is required for producing all the variety we observe in the nature, and how much of the variation is just caused by noise.
 Daniel Biro (daniel.biro@med.einstein.yu.edu) (I work on computational models of evolution that incorporate aspects of development, particularly robustness)
 Lin-Qing (lchen@pitp.ca)(I study physics, I haven't worked on morphogenesis yet, but I'm very interested in different mechanism of structure formation.)
