Keywords
Interdisciplinarity, Epistemology, Fractals, Empirical Research

Summary
This project consists on creating real time Interdisciplinary dialogue. How we conceive and relate to our models, its pros and cons and, what can we learn from our different fields? What steps are needed for implementing awesome mathematical models into human reality so societies can actually integrate them? Hence, what are some of the gaps and challenges that we often encounter in the transmission of scientific knowledge into political, social and cultural systems?
What is the model for consciousness in your Complex Systems Field? Is it rational agents? Self emerging systems? Politics and health systems? Relation of bees and flowers? Human interactions in networks? Frankenstein supercomputers taking over the world? Sentient structures? Maybe no conscience at all! With this interdisciplinary soup we can see what emerges in our interactions.

You can think of it as a little oasis of reflection in the midst of the project frenzy…with a side project! So it’s taking a breath to reflect on what we are actually doing. And moreover, what does the application of our models imply? If what we do is useful, what use could that be, and how can we efficiently communicate that to people outside our fields (very often in the decision making processes or the receiving end).
In that sense, it is more like a workshop, with the final point integrating some of our exchanges. If the qualitative aspects for this interaction are non-predictable, we can hopefully arrive to some general conclusions and acquiring some meaningful insight in our fields...or bring up some interesting new questions!

So no brain frying needed into the wee hours of the night, it’s just taking some (restricted) time in 4 sessions to reflect on what our work implies in an interdisciplinary environment in an open and convivial setting.

Concretely, what you need to do is: Show up in time to the 4 sessions and exchange in dialogue. We present our models and how do we relate to them, why do we think they are important or working, or lacking, and then see if we can learn something from other models and transdisciplinary applications.

There will be a second phase to analyze the information gathered. It’s not mandatory to participate (for example due to time constraints from your main projects) but the people willing to do it can chip in with their skills to find a way to apply some of our models to our own process (in a way, like a fractal intake of our own medicine) and see what we can get out of this experience. For example, beyond the analysis on group dynamics, ideas and concepts sprouting, can we spot patterns from the waveform of the audio recorded from the sessions? Are there peaks correlated to certain ideas or sensible points? Would a time series analysis of this give out something of interest? As the group is established, do we see a form showing up, some bifurcation or change of state that is different form the end in regards to the beginning? 

Group Contact
Jesus Mario Serna (jesus.mario.sv@gmail.com)

Gaetano Dato (gdato7@gmail.com)



Interested
Juste Raimbault will enjoy to participate to the first part

