Keywords
history of ideas, evolution of philosophy, perception, behavior, feedback

Summary
I have talked with a few people regarding my curiosity surrounding the relationship between the way we perceive of ourselves in relation to the world around us and how these concepts are informed, embodied, and reinforced by a myriad of behaviors. In the process of questioning how philosophy can be considered a complex system some interesting ideas have emerged.  After a brief conversation with one of our colleagues about "philosophical species," I identified an open-source data set that represents a Philosophical Influence Network (PIN). It represents quite a significant network spanning back to pre-socratic philosophy. I think this can be a decent starting point for some impressive narratives. Scottish philosopher David Hume, likened philosophical disciplines to species and this metaphor may be appropriate to utilize as we consider the evolution or "conceptual drift" of philosophical ideas. 

I would also like to add that I am completely open to ideas surrounding this topic, i.e. I noticed someone mentioned the evolution of genes, memes, and temes; I think to some extent we have an overlap in interest. 

Another caveat is the source of the PIN is problematic; it is sourced from the "influenced by" side bar on wikipedia for philosophers. Thus we encounter bias, fanboys, conflict, and other kinds of noise. However there are other databases that may be more objective i.e the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 

Potential Directions
Where ideas go to die: Considering the richness of the PIN, it was suggested we may be able to search where ideas do really well and where others go to die. Each philosopher represents and attractor, furthermore each attractor interestingly represents ideas or concepts embodied within philosophical characters. This focus allows us to consider the drift, mutation, and other evolutionary processes surrounding concepts embedded in networks.

Why do "good" ideas go "bad?" : In this vein a couple of people have mentioned how we may explore what drives religion into war. Religions historically are meant to promote a kind of moral reasoning however throughout history as well as in contemporary society we see that religious fanaticism can drive violent acts. To what extent can we account for religious extremism and the emergence of groups like ISIS, and to what extent can we trace how violent ideologies emerge from moral doctrines?

Philosophy Divided: As we participate in the CSSS 2016  I can't help but recognize many philosophical assumptions we seem to tacitly evoke and at the same time identify other areas as painfully philosophical. In many regards this tension between the sciences and philosophy date back to Bacon's rejection of Aristotelianism. And as the scientific revolution emerged, a focus on the techne (artifact) also emerged, as a technical understanding of the physis or natural world, accompanied with technological advance. Today it seems as though the Aristotelian notions of techne and physis are "coming back around again." Can we account for the evolution of philosophical ideas in such a way that we can reimagine ancient philosophical concepts as complementary to novel research methods.

Group Contact
Justin Williams (justin.williams@unt.edu)

Interested
Data Sets
