Summary
Note: I've changed the description/scope of the project.
Prestige goods, in a nutshell, are goods whose primary value is in conveying social status/ranking (think Rolexes and iPhones).  There is a great deal of speculation about how they contribute to increasing social complexity, including the idea that they were an older signaling system that predated true social stratification.  Aimee Plourde has developed a costly signaling model of prestige goods that AFAIK has not been a) implemented as an ABM or b) tested out on a actual hunter-gatherer social network.  We would like to remedy both of these omissions to explore the dynamics of prestige-as-costly-signaling over time, and whether it gives rise to any suggestive emergent behavior.  
The basic idea is to generate a "typical" hunter-gatherer social network (albeit based on historical ethnographic data).  Individuals will start out with different levels of skill/success (the base case is low/high) and will interact with others in their network, resulting in gain/loss of skill and/or prestige.  
Data for this is iffy, so primarily we would be looking at it as an exploratory model (but if anyone has data ideas let us know).
Kantner from the Santa Fe School of Advanced Studies has an alternate game-theory model for prestige goods that would be interesting to implement as well as time allows.  

Group Contact
Ellen Badgley (flyingrat42@gmail.com)

Interested participants, please sign up below
Simon Carrignon: I wrote already a general ABM to study that kind of things, but would be really happy to start from scratch something new in python or whatever!
 Awesome! I started reading your paper and it looks like a great starting point - maybe we could extend the model to distinguish between common goods (subsistence-level, go away after each season) and permanent prestige goods that convey social value, as well as looking into the implementations of prestige on agent actions.  If you would like to continue working on this for CSSS let's talk. - Ellen
Donovan Platt (donovan.platt@students.wits.ac.za)
Will Hamilton (wleif@stanford.edu)
Joris Broere (j.j.broere@uu.nl)
William Leibzon (william@leibzon.org> - mostly observer/lurk mode

Group Organization
We have a Slack channel on https://sfi-csss-2016.slack.com.  If you need an invite to the Slack team, email flyingrat42@gmail.com.



Meetings

We're meeting in the coffee shop at 6:30, June 15th.

