The Arxiv [1] is a free online repository of scientific preprint articles, mostly from physics and mathematics.  It currently contains over 800,000 articles, dating back to 1991.  Currently, a lot of the data associated with this repository is completely available: paper submission dates; full texts of papers; author names and coauthorship information.  Additionally, there is some citations data available.  (If necessary, I can also find papers' subdiscipline labels; submitting authors' email address domain names; other things.)

In the past I have been using these data to try and explore how communities of authors who have shared interests grow over time.  For example, we can pinpoint the first ever paper about topological insulators, and search for all subsequent papers on that topic.  As more papers are written, authors begin to join the field of research and to form strong ties by collaborating with one another.  We can use the ArXiv data to visualize and analyze exactly how these communities form and grow.

Brainstorming notes
Isolation between topics, crossing interdisciplinary boundaries, finding (topological) separation distance between disciplines or research groups

Tipping points - can we look for separation of or mergers of two groups or disciplines?

Can we identify key papers (or groups of papers) that initiate ties between fields.

Sentiment analysis: can we identify when a paper's citation is an endorsement or a refutation?

Tools for Analysis: Change point detection; relational event models

Can we find more comprehensive/better citation data?

Lucene and indexing tools:
- Can we re-index our text database after removing stop words?
- Can we index the titles and abstracts?
- Elastic Search - tool for interacting with Lucene

This set of text-processing tutorials is pretty handy for background info and inspiration. The software package doesn't simply plug-into a Lucene/Solr/Elastic Search index, but it could be done. This package from Standford seems very capable.

Next meeting
Thursday @ 9AM in Coffee Shop

