Clauset, Shalizi and Newman (2009) propose a maximum likelihood method to estimate the powerlaw exponent of a variable of interest. This is a great improvement on earlier methods such as OLS that dominated the literature up to then. However, one can fit a powerlaw to any dataset and the most we can say is that our observations are consistent with the hypothesis that x is drawn from a powerlaw distribution. One easily implementable method to compare the powerlaw fit to other fits is then a likelihood ratio test for both models. 

One particular discussion is the distinction between a powerlaw (PL) and a log-normal (LN) fit. For an avid discussion between both fits on city size and Zipf's law, see Eeckhout (2004, 2009) and Levy (2009), where the discussion now settled on city sizes following a log-normal distribution instead of a powerlaw. Similarly for the discussion on firm size distribution: Simon and Bonini, 1958; Ijri and Simon, 1977; Stanley et al., 1995; Sutton, 1997; Axtell, 2001; Okuyama et al., 1999; Cabral and Mata, 2003; Gaffeo et al., 2003; Aoyama et al., 2004; Fujiwara et al., 2004a,b; Kaizoji et al., 2006; Takayasu et al., 2008; Duchin and Levy, 2008; Schwarzkopf and Farmer, 2008, ...

This distinction matters for several reasons:
- PL and LN come from very similar model and differences in initial conditions can lead to very different outcomes. PL exhibits a choice for x_min, below which the unit of observation is not feasible to exist (eg minimum city size, firm size, word length, ...). LN has no minimum size.
- PL and LN that look similar are the difference between infinite (PL) and large but finite variance (LN)
- shock propagation: when unit-level shocks are large enough to show aggregate perturbances if the distribution is powerlaw with infinite variance, while these shocks wash out fast when the distribution is log-normal. (Gabaix, 1999; Gabaix 2009; Acemoglu et al. 2012, ...).

I have encountered some issues which I would like to explore further:
1. The distinction between lognormal and powerlaw in the data is very sensitive to data truncation: in the above discussions, researchers have slightly different datasets, covering more or less of the population at hand. Left-truncation (i.e. observations not in the dataset because they are too small to be reported) can strongly drive the outcome of the fit, even when endogenizing the x_min cutoff. I have data on the universe of Belgian firms, much more complete than e.g. US Census data, where I have done some preliminary tests on this. The question is then: how to formalise this distinction and what are the theoretical and practical caveats to look out for when applying this method.
2. MLE fitting seems to be sensitive to the choice of units as well: rescaling a variable by a factor 1000, 1000000 etc seems to influence the endogenous x_min choice and hence the estimated parameter. This reminds me of some work on scaling invariance in negative binomial estimators. What is going on here?
3. Can we set up a model that generalises both? I've been looking at Levy stable distributions, but did not do anything with it yet.

Interested people:

 Corbain
 Laura
Binyang
Sahil
Tirtha
Glenn
Junming
 ---
 William Lebzon Don't count me as interested (I probably would join another project but could potentially check in with what you do), but I have read almost all papers you posted before because I needed a way to check if what I had was scale free or not. I ended up using matlab script I found written by one of the previous SFI postdocs (will try to find a link). I'd be interested in what you come up with, but I'm myself fairly bad with pure statistics theory. I may or may not have a dataset with me (I will check) that I collected and analyzed for scale-free properties and found to be super-linear with alpha>1. Any power-law fit you do should similarly show if something sublinear, superlinear, or scale-free. Another issue is being able to get statistics on likelyhood of data having small-world properties - while theoretically scale-free networks in the limit would approach small-world, in practice this may or may not be true, if statistics on this could be done together, it could be helpful.
Literature:
Powerlaw fitting in empirical data - Clauset, Shalizi and Newman (2009): http://arxiv.org/abs/0706.1062

