There appear to be striking similarities between how we design software, and how evolution designed cells. Some of the analogies are:
- The concept of "Encapsulation". In object oriented programs, data inside an object is protected by an interface of functions. Similarly, processes within a cell (intra-cellular signaling cascades) are protected from the extra-cellular messaging activities through membrane-bound receptors acting as the interface.
- Apoptosis (programmed cell death) is similar to proper memory deallocation in programs, while Necrosis is similar to dangling pointers and memory corruption.
- Proteolysis (breaking down of proteins into constituent amino acids) is similar to automatic garbage collection.

There are certain constraints (perhaps physical constraints) on the available solutions in biology. Solutions within this constrained solution space eventually result in the emergence of complex behavior. This emergent behavior has enabled humans to engineer solutions to everyday problems. These artificially engineered solutions are very similar in principal to the solutions that already exist in biological systems.

Are our creative processes ultimately bound by the physical constraints that underlie molecular mechanisms? Or, do we just tend to interpret the phenomena at the molecular level according to our own understanding, which is limited by our senses and neurological processes? Is it all about optimization, and everything else is just a side effect?
Can/do “Patterns” transcend disciplines?

Motifs (biological systems) – Patterns (software). Patterns/motifs transcending biological and software systems could perhaps, fill gaps in our knowledge of biological systems, and help us design better software systems. Deterministic patterns could perhaps indicate what is required for high level functions to emerge from molecular interactions. And perhaps these similarities occur at the interface between low level interaction and emergent phenomena.

So let's further explore biological and software systems, and try to find answers to these questions.

For more information, please contact Fahad (fahad.khalid@hpi.uni-potsdam.de).

Interested: 
Fahad 
Ernest (yu.liu@math.uu.se) 
Diana 
Degang (dwuab@ust.hk) 
Stojan 
Ana María
Brian 

