One of the central open questions in biology is to understand how genotypes map onto phenotypes. While system and developmental biologists are 
interested in the physical, biochemical and physiological basis of genotype-phenotype maps, evolutionary biologists try to comprehend their evolutionary causes 
and consequences. Our current knowledge on this question comes from computational models that allow us to rapidly map genotypes to phenotypes for some biological 
systems, facilitating the systematic exploration of their vast genotype spaces. These models have shown that many genotypes usually map onto the same phenotype. 
These genotypes form genotype networks, or neutral networks, that spread into genotype space. These networks contain as vertices all the genotypes that share a 
same phenotype, where genotypes are connected by edges if they differ by a single mutation. 

Thanks to several computational models, the formalism of genotype networks has been very successful at providing new insights about the evolution of systems as 
diverse as RNA, proteins, regulatory networks and metabolism. Payne & Wagner have recently pioneered the application of this formalism to transcription factor (TF) 
binding sites. TFs are DNA-binding proteins that regulate gene expression by binding to short sequences on DNA — TF binding sites — that 
are in close physical proximity to the genes’ coding sequence, thus inducing or repressing gene transcription. The set of DNA sites bound by a particular TF 
can be viewed as a genotype network. This mapping from TF binding sites onto their cognate TFs constitutes the first exhaustive genotype-phenotype map entirely 
based on experimental data. 

Research questions that can be asked in this system: 
1. What is the geometry of empirical genotype networks in genotype space and how that geometry affects evolutionary exploration? 
2. What is the community structure of these empirical genotype networks? Is this structure determined by the biophysics of TF-DNA binding? 
3. How accesible is one phenotype from any other phenotype in this system and how that accessibility defines phenotype space as a topological space? 

If you are interested please contact José (jose.aguilar@ieu.uzh.ch). 

References: 
1. Stadler, B.M., Stadler, P.F., Wagner, G.P., and Fontana, W. (2001). The topology of the possible: formal spaces underlying patterns of evolutionary change. J. Theor. Biol. 213, 241–74. 
2. Payne, J.L., and Wagner, A. (2014). The robustness and evolvability of transcription factor binding sites. Science 343, 875–7. 

Interested: 
Cole 
Glen 
José 
Leto 
Massimo 
Renske 
Leo
Brian

