Keywords
deep learning, time series classification, discretization

Summary
1.0. The goal.
We attempt to address the problem of insufficient data instances for neural net training by creating new data instances via Complexity Warping application to the existing data. Our project is concern with time series classification (TSC) problem where the standard benchmark dataset (i.e [| the UCR dataset]) typically has very few instances in training data, which significantly affects neural network training and cross-validation process performance. 

2.0. The approach taken.
We think that probably the best explanation of the problem and the approach, a different technique though, is given by Patrice Y. Simard, Dave Stdeinkraus, and John C. Platt in their work titled "Best Practices for Convolutional Neural Networks Applied to Visual Document Analysis" [1] ...
"...Synthesizing plausible transformations of data is simple, but the “inverse” problem – transformation invariance – can be arbitrarily complicated. Fortunately, learning algorithms are very good at learning inverse problems. Given a classification task, one may apply transformations to generate additional data and let the learning algorithm infer the transformation invariance. This invariance is embedded in the parameters, so it is in some sense free, since the computation at recognition time is unchanged. If the data is scarce and if the distribution to be learned has transformation-invariance properties, generating additional data using transformations may even improve performance. In the case of handwriting recognition, we postulate that the distribution has some invariance with respect to not only affine transformations, but also elastic deformations corresponding to uncontrolled oscillations of the hand muscles, dampened by inertia..."

At the first prototyping iteration, for simplicity of the feasibility evaluation, we plan to re-use Diana Dabby's approach for variation (warping) of musical pitch sequences: "..The sensitive dependence property of chaotic trajectories offers a natural mechanism for variability. By affixing the pitch sequence of a musical work to a reference chaotic trajectory, it is possible to generate meaningful variations via a mapping between neighboring chaotic trajectories and the reference. The variations result from changes in the ordering of the pitch sequence. But two chaotic orbits started at nearly the same initial point in state space soon become uncorrelated. To counter this, the mapping was designed so that a nearby trajectory could often track the reference, thus tempering the extent of the separation. Tracking means that pitches in the variation appear exactly where they did in the source. However, regardless of whether the two trajectories track, the mapping links the variation with the original by ensuring only those pitch events found in the source piece comprise the variation..." For the next iteration we plan to re-use the Liz Bradley's technique or some other approach (if found)... 

Essentially, we would expect the Complexity warping to work somewhat similar to the displacement field transform which is illustrated on the figure below (from [1]):



However, our approach will differ as we are going to build it upon the symbolic discretization illustrated on the figure below:



Some References
Group Contact
Pavel Senin (seninp@gmail.com) 
Nicole M Beckage 
Pinar Ozisik

Interested Participants
